# Data Mining

Data Mining - many related fields ( Data science, ML, stats) can be viewed under the single umbrella term "data mining" = extracting useful knowledge / patterns from data 

Data mining is useful because it has the power to turn raw/ transactional data into actionable knowledge. It can be used in many types of ways for eg: recommendation systems. Like in ecommerce sites such as amazon, prime etc: Association rule example form (used in recommendation systems): If customer buys X and Y, then they are also likely to buy Z. 

# Why Data Mining is important - Scientific Viewpoint 

Modern science and tech generates massive amounts of data very quickly - this makes it difficult to analyse manually 

Examples of large data sources:
1. Genome data: DNA sequencing produces extremely large datasets 
2. Protein data: Used in bioinformatics to study protein structures and functions. 
3. Astronomical data: Telescopes generate huge image datasets of space. 
4. Digital data: Emails, youtube and other online content also produce large datasets. 

Problem - traditional methods like statistical or manual analysis techniques cannot handle raw, extremely large datasets. 

Why cant they handle large datasets? 

1. Enormity of data - the sheer volume of the data is too much 
2. High dimensionality - Data can have many variables / features 
3. Heterogeneous and distributed data - data comes from many sources ( images, text, biological data etc)

The scientific motivation for data mining is the need to **automatically analyse large, complex, high dimensional datasets** generated by modern technologies and scientific research. 

Data mining is a field withing computer science focused on **discovering useful patterns and knowledge from large datasets**. It combines several techniques from areas such as *Machine learning *Statistics *Artificial Intelligence *Database systems 

The term data mining can be a bit misleading the goal is **not to extract the data itself** but to extract **meaningful patterns, relationship and knowledge from the data.**

To summarise: Data mining focuses on discovering patterns and useful knowledge **from large datasets using computational statistical techniques**

The term **Data mining** became popular because of marketing. Even though most of data mining techniques are already present in traditional Machine learning and statistical analysis. There was a well known book that was mainly about machine learning techniques that used the word **Data mining** in the title mainly to attract attention. 

Data mining mainly refers to **large scale data analysis** using techniques from *machine learning, *Artificial intelligence and *Statistics

**Data Mining** = broader term used in industry for analystics + machine learning applied to large datasets

# Pattern Recognition 